Glossary of Arabic toponyms
The glossary of Arabic toponyms gives translations of Arabic terms commonly found as components in Arabic toponyms. A significant number of them were put together during the PEF Survey of Palestine carried out in the second half of the 19th century.

A

'Ain, pl.: `Ayūn, ʿUyūn
Spring, fountain, source. Examples: El Aaiún 
All pages with titles containing Ain
All pages with titles containing Aiun

Ab, Abu
Father; as a geographical term it signifies "producing", "containing", etc.;
All pages with titles containing Ab
All pages with titles containing Abu

Arak, pl.: Arkan
Cavern or cliff (among various meanings); see All pages with titles containing Arak

B

Bab, pl.: Buwab
Gate. Examples Bab el-Mandeb; see All pages with titles containing Bab
Baḥr
 Arabic: بحر - Sea, large river.  see All pages with titles containing Bahr
Beit
House.  see All pages with titles containing Beit
Balad
Arabic: بلد (sometimes transliterated as Beled or Belled) - Town;  see All pages with titles containing Balad
Bir
Arabic: بير, Well;  see All pages with titles containing Bir
Birkeh
 Artificial pool, tank;  see All pages with titles containing Birkeh
Buḥayra, Baḥeirah
Arabic: بحيرة, Lake, lagoon; Diminutive of بَحْر (baḥr, “sea”).  
Burj
Arabic: برج, Tower, castle;  see All pages with titles containing Burj

C

Casbah
a kind of medina (old city) or fortress; cf. "Qasba"; see All pages with titles containing Casbah

D

Dar
wikt:دار house; see Relevant pages with titles containing Dar 
Deir
wikt:دير monastery, convent, cloister (often ruins thereof); see All pages with titles containing Deir 
Derb
wikt:درب road, pass;see All pages with titles containing Derb 
Dhahr
wikt:ظهر ridge; All pages with titles containing Dhahr 

H

Haram
Sacred place; see All pages with titles containing Haram 
Haud
Reservoir, pond; see All pages with titles containing Haud 

I

Ibn
Son; as a geographical term it signifies "producing", "containing", etc. see All pages with titles containing Ibn

J

Jama'a,  Djama'a, Jami'a
place of gathering, community, mosque;
All pages with titles containing Jama'a
All pages with titles containing Jami'a

Jazira, Jezireh, Jeziret
Island;
All pages with titles containing Jazira
All pages with titles containing Jezireh
All pages with titles containing Jeziret

Jebel,  Djebel, Jebal, Jabal
mountain;
All pages with titles containing Jabal
All pages with titles containing Jebal
All pages with titles containing Jebel
All pages with titles containing Djebel

Jisr
bridge; see All pages with titles containing Jisr

Jubb
(Arabic: جُبّ ): well, pit; see All pages with titles containing Jubb

K

Kafr, Kafar, Kafer, Kufur, Kfar 
Ultimately from an unattested "Mari language" through Akkadian and Aramaic, meaning "unfortified town". See the Wiktionary entry at كفر. Equivalent to Modern Hebrew Kfar. Unrelated to kafir or kufr.
All pages with titles containing Kafr
All pages with titles containing Kafar
All pages with titles containing Kafer
All pages with titles containing Kufur
All pages with titles containing Kfar

Kasbah, Kasba, Kasaba 
See Qasba
All pages with titles containing Kasba
All pages with titles containing Kasbah

Khan 
From Persian xân, meaning caravanserai. Unrelated to the "Khan" in "Genghis Khan". 
Relevant pages with titles containing Khan

Khirbet, Khurbet, Khirbat, etc.
is the conjunctive form "ruin of" (خربة)  of the Arabic word for "ruin" (خرب, khirba, khirbeh, kharab ("ruined"))
All pages with titles containing Khirbet
All pages with titles containing Khirbat
All pages with titles containing Khurbet
All pages with titles containing Kharab

Ksar, qsar, plural: ksour, qsour
Maghrebi Arabic; See "Qasr"
All pages with titles containing Ksar
All pages with titles containing Ksour
All pages with titles containing Qsar

Kul'ah, Kal'at, Kalat, Kala, Kaleh
Arabic, Persian. See "Qalat"
All pages with titles containing Kal'at
All pages with titles containing Kalat
All pages with titles containing Kaleh

M

Mazar
مزار: shrine, grave, tomb, etc.  cf. "Mazar (mausoleum)". The placename usually refers to a grave of a saint, ruler, etc.. Examples: Mazar-i-Sharif
All pages with titles containing Mazar
All pages with titles containing Al-Mazar
All pages with titles containing Almazar

Mazra', Mazra'a, Al-Mazra'a, Mazraa
 مزرعة, mazraʿa: farm, مزرع, mazraʿ: field, farmland, origin for majra, hamlet in Indian subcontinent

N

Nahr
wikt:نهر, river, with the particular meaning of perennial water course, as opposed to a seasonal one, which is called a wadi; see All pages with titles containing Nahr-e

O

Oued 
 In North African Arabic, same as Wadi; see All pages with titles containing Oued

Q

Qabr, Kabr, pl.:Qubūr
Arabic: قَبْر, pl. Arabic: قُبُور - tomb, grave 
All pages with titles containing Qabr
All pages with titles containing Qubur

Qal'a (construct state: qal'at)
Arabic, Persian. Fortified place, fort, fortress, castle;
All pages with titles containing al-Qal'a
All pages with titles containing Qal'at

Casbah, Kasbah, Qaṣba, Qaṣbah, Qaṣaba
Arabic: القصبة, romanized: al-qaṣaba), a kind of medina (old city) or fortress
All pages with titles containing Casbah
All pages with titles containing Qasba
All pages with titles containing Qasbah
All pages with titles containing Qasaba
All pages with titles containing Kasbah

Qaṣr, Kaṣr, al-Qaṣr, pl.:Quṣūr
Arabic: قصر, lit. 'palace/castle/fortress', from Latin castrum 
All pages with titles containing Qasr
All pages with titles containing Kasr
All pages with titles containing Qusur
It entered into Spanish and Portuguese placenames in the forms Alcazar, Alcácer
North African (Maghrebi Arabic) form: Ksar
 The dictionary definition of qasr at Wiktionary

R

Ras
wikt:رأس, head, cape, top, peak, etc., see All pages with titles containing Ras

Rujm, plural: rujum
wikt:رجم, mound, cairn, hill, spur, and also as "stone heap" or "tumulus".
All pages with titles containing Rujm
All pages with titles containing Rujum

S

souk, sūq, souq
wikt:سوق, "market"
All pages with titles containing Souk
All pages with titles containing Suk
All pages with titles containing Souq

U

Umm
Mother; as a geographical term it signifies "producing", "containing", etc.; cf. "Mother of all"; see All pages with titles containing Umm

W

Wadi, Wad, North African Arabic: see Oued
Watercourse: stream (often intermittent stream), sometimes dry waterbed, valley 
All pages with titles containing Wadi
All pages with titles containing Wady
All pages with titles containing Wad
All pages with titles containing Oued

See also
Toponymy of Maghreb
Oikonyms in Western and South Asia
Place names of Palestine
List of Arabic place names

References

Sources

External links
The intro to a 1950s gazetteer for 35,000 placenames of Arabian Peninsula and surrounding waters and islands  contains a glossary of generic toponymic features

[[Earth science]] [[Engineering]] [[Geographic information system]] [[Glossary of Hebrew toponyms]] [[Glossary of aerospace engineering]] [[Glossary of agriculture]] [[Glossary of archaeology]] [[Glossary of architecture]] [[Glossary of areas of mathematics]] [[Glossary of artificial intelligence]] [[Glossary of astronomy]] [[Glossary of biology]] [[Glossary of bird terms]] [[Glossary of botanical terms]] [[Glossary of calculus]] [[Glossary of cellular and molecular biology (0–L)]] [[Glossary of cellular and molecular biology (M–Z)]]
