Pages (word processor)
Pages is a word processing program developed by Apple that is part of the iWork productivity suite. It runs on the macOS, iPadOS, and iOS operating systems and is also available on the iCloud website. The first version of Pages was released in February 2005. Pages is marketed by Apple as an easy-to-use application that allows users to quickly create documents on their devices. Many Apple-designed templates comprising different themes (such as letters, résumés, posters, and outlines) are included with Pages.

History
On January 11, 2005, Apple announced the first version of Pages, as part of iWork '05. On January 6, 2009, Apple released the fourth version of Pages as a component of iWork '09. On January 27, 2010, Apple announced a new version of Pages for iPad with a touch interface. On May 31, 2011, Apple updated the iOS version of Pages to 1.4, providing it as a universal binary, which allowed the app to be run on iPhones and iPod Touch devices, in addition to iPads. On October 12, 2011, Apple updated the iOS app to version 1.5, adding the iCloud "Documents in the Cloud" feature. iOS Pages was updated to version 1.6 on March 7, 2012, and will only run on iOS 5.1 or later. Pages for OS X was updated to version 4.3 on December 4, 2012, to support Pages 1.7 for iOS, which was released on the same day. Pages for iOS 1.7.1 introduced better compatibility with Word and Pages for Mac, and version 1.7.2, released on March 7, 2013, merely added stability improvements and bug fixes.
On October 23, 2013, Apple released a redesign with Pages 5.0 and made it free for anyone with an iOS device. In this release, many templates, as well as some advanced features that were available in version 4.3, were not included. Some of these missing features were put back over subsequent releases, but the current release still lacks features from version 4.3, including the ability to select non-contiguous regions of text, advanced find/replace functions, and more.
As part of the launch of Apple Creator Studio on January 28, 2026, version 15.1 of Pages for macOS was released as a new app rather than an update to the existing app, which will no longer receive any new features. The iOS and iPadOS versions were unaffected by this and received the update as normal. As part of this, the application moved to a freemium model, with everything remaining free except for the newly added advanced editing features, which require an Apple Creator Studio subscription.

Features
Pages is a word processor and page layout application. When Pages is opened, users are presented with a document Open window with a "New Document" button. The "New Document" button opens a template chooser which allows them to start with a blank document or with a predesigned template — including a basic, report, letter, résumé, envelope, business card, flyers & posters, cards, miscellaneous and a newsletter section of templates — that contains placeholder text and images which can be replaced by dragging and dropping photos from the Media Browser. The Media Browser provides quick access to media from iTunes, iMovie, and Photos. Users can drag and drop music, movies, and photos directly into Pages documents from the Media Browser window.
Each document window contains a toolbar, which gives one-click access to commonly used functions such as inserting objects (text boxes, shapes, tables, charts, and comments), uploading the document to iWork.com, and adding additional pages. In addition, the document window contains a contextual format bar that allows one-click formatting of text and adjustments to images. When text is selected, the format bar enables users to choose fonts, text size, and color, and to adjust line spacing and alignment. When an image is selected, the format bar displays tools to adjust opacity, show and hide shadow and reflection effects, and mask the image. A separate Inspector window provides almost all formatting options available for any element in the open document.
Beginning in iWork '08, word processing and page layout are two distinct modes. In word processing mode, Pages supports headers and footers, footnotes and outlining, and list creation. Users can collaborate with others on a document. Pages tracks changes by users by displaying each person's edits in different colors. Users can also add comments alongside the document. In page layout mode, users have complete control over the position of objects on the page. Images and text can be placed anywhere on the canvas.
Pages used to feature several other advanced writing tools. Many of these have been stripped out of the current version. The "Full Screen" mode (introduced in Mac OS X Lion) and supported in Pages 4.1 hid the menubar and toolbars, allowing users to focus on a single document without being distracted by other windows on the screen; however, after Pages 5, full-screen mode requires the user to manually hide various panes for focused writing and the page thumbnails pane does not automatically open when the cursor is moved to the left screen edge. Earlier versions featured mail merge, which automatically populated custom fields with contact data from the Address Book or Numbers apps to create personalized documents. For example, if a user wanted to send one letter to three people, mail merge allowed the user to create a single document with placeholder fields that were populated when printing. The mail merge feature was completely removed in version 5 and it did not return until version 12.1. Tables and charts pasted from Numbers are automatically updated if the original spreadsheet is changed.

Compatibility
Pages can import some Microsoft Word documents (including Word 2007's Office Open XML format). Pages 4 and earlier could also import AppleWorks word processing documents, and export documents to rich text, but those features were removed in Pages 5.0 and not restored until Pages 6.1. Pages 5 can still export files in PDF, EPUB, and Microsoft Word DOC formats.
Simple and complex mathematical equations can be written for a Pages document with macOS's Grapher, offering similar capabilities to Microsoft Equation Editor (plus 2D and 3D rendering tools only Grapher can use).
As of January 2015, Pages does not support OpenDocument file format. 
The only software other than Pages that can open its files are Apple's iWork productivity suite through Apple's iCloud, LibreOffice, and Jumpshare. Windows users can view and edit Pages files using iWork for iCloud via a web browser. The iCloud system can also read Microsoft Word files and convert Pages files to Microsoft Word format. Jumpshare can view Pages files.
Other than accessing iCloud through a browser, no program can officially view or edit a Pages file using Windows or Linux. Some content can be retrieved from a document created in Pages '09 because a .pages file is a bundle. A user can open a .pages file in an unpackaging program or by renaming files as .zip files in Windows (XP and onwards) and will find either a .jpg or .pdf preview in its entirety for viewing and printing, although this is only possible if the creator of the .pages files elected to include a preview (by default, this feature is left on). The user will also find a .xml file with unformatted text. This process can also be used for users of the 2008 version of Pages to open documents saved in the 2009 version of Pages, which are not backward compatible.
Pages can also export documents into several formats; formatting is generally retained during the export process.

Version history

See also
List of word processors
Comparison of word processors
Comparison of desktop publishing software
List of desktop publishing software
Apple iWork

References

External links

Official website

[[AbiWord]] [[Adobe InDesign]] [[Apple Books]] [[Atlantis Word Processor]] [[Collabora Online]] [[Computing platform]] [[Desktop publishing]] [[EPUB]] [[Electronic publishing]] [[IPad]] [[IStudio Publisher]] [[ITunes]] [[LaTeX]] [[PagePlus]] [[QuarkXPress]] [[Scrivener (software)]]
